>> Hello and welcome to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a podcast about Haskell, a
purely functional programming language.
I'm your host, Taylor Fausak.
I'm the Director of Software
Engineering at ACI Learning.
And with me today is a special
guest, Tom Sydney Kerckhove.
Thanks for joining me, Syd!
>> Thank you for having me.
>> And I'm sorry for
mispronouncing your last name.
As you said, we don't have that
in English and that's one of
the only languages I speak.
So apologies.
>> No worries, happens a lot.
>> I think many people in the
community are already familiar with
you, but for those that aren't, could
you explain who you are and what
you've done in the Haskell community?
>> Alright.
Uh, so, uh, my name is Syd.
I do a lot of testing related work.
I am a big voice for
sustainable Haskell development.
So stuff that works basically.
>> Nice.
And you mentioned testing.
This isn't going to be the
main topic today, but you
have a testing library, right?
Do you want to plug that?
>> Oh yeah, I have many of those.
Um, so um, I have, my first bit
of work in testing was based on
validity based testing, which is
basically property testing with
free generators and free shrinking.
And then after that, I also built
syd-test, which is a spiritual successor
to hspec with some modern testing
features and more robust testing.
>> Nice.
So I'll be sure to include links to
that in the show notes for this episode.
So if you want to up your testing
game, please check out those libraries.
But as I mentioned, that's
not our main focus today.
What we're going to be talking about is
something you posted in the past couple of
weeks, which is about a JSON vulnerability
in the venerable Aeson library.
Um, could you give us a overview from a
high level of what that vulnerability is?
>> Um yup, so when you parse JSON, the
Aeson library uses a hash map to represent
JSON objects, which are key value things.
Uh they're stored in a hash map.
The hash map comes from
unordered-containers.
unordered-containers uses
hashable for its hashing.
hashable uses a non collision resistant
hash function, which means that when
you find collisions in this hash, and
you can — and the user can input them,
then they can make the insertions into
the hash map in Aeson uh, occur in
quadratic time rather than linear time.
And therefore taking down your
server while parsing the JSON.
>> Right.
And this can be — this, um,
vulnerability can be exploited with
a like pre crafted input, right?
And you actually provided one
of those in the blog post.
Is that right?
>> Yep.
That's right.
So, there is a, um, single digit megabyte
JSON blob that you can send to any Haskell
server that parses JSON to take it down.
Because the collisions are built against
a certain salt for the hash and the
salt is fixed in the hashable library.
>> Right.
So not good news for anyone
running a Haskell server that
accepts input from the public.
So what made you start looking into this?
What was the context around
discovering this vulnerability?
>> So at the time I was working at
FP Complete and we were looking into
dependencies of one of our clients,
um, to see if the dependencies
would cause them any trouble or
if they were even appropriate.
Um, and there was a comment in
unordered-containers that says, don't use
this for user input because it's not safe.
And then I was when thinking,
well, where is this being used?
It turns out it was used in Aeson,
which is accepting user input.
So that's where it all came from.
And then that led down a big rabbit hole.
Um, that started by going like,
Hey Aeson maintainers, why don't
you use, um, something that
doesn't have this big warning.
Um, and then it ended with
crafting an exploit so that we
had, let's say, more leverage.
>> Right.
So it seems like, um, you mentioned there
are multiple libraries involved here.
There's Aeson, which is doing
the JSON parsing and conversion.
And there's unordered-containers,
which is providing the hash map.
And then there's hashable, which is the
hash library for unordered-containers.
So it seems like there are multiple
places this problem could be fixed.
Um, I think that you provided a pull
request, a change set, to fix this,
uh, which library did you target?
>> Um, I targeted unordered-containers.
It's not clear that the fix
that I proposed is good in
general, but it's certainly fixed
the problem that we exposed.
Um, so the idea was to use a different
structure than a linear array.
Then, then, uh, then linear chaining for
dealing with collisions in the hash map.
Um, right now it uses an array.
And then whenever the collision is
detected, uh, the second element or the
next element in the array will be used,
which means that however many elements
were already there, they all need to
be traversed in order to add something.
Um, and instead, what I proposed
is to use a recursive hash map
there with a different salt.
This means that any collision would have
to be in order to be a problem, would
have to not only be a collision on the
salt that is at the top level, but also
every recursive salt going downwards.
Um, this works rather well, assuming
that crafting collisions on multiple
salts at the same time is difficult.
And that assumption might breakdown,
for example, if the salt is ignored.
So there are good reasons to reject
such an approach, even though it would
have fixed the Aeson vulnerability.
>> Right.
And to my knowledge, this is a
relatively novel, um, solution
to this problem, because this
is something that affects other
languages and other libraries as well.
Pretty much anything that uses a hash
map could be susceptible to this problem.
Um, You mentioned linear chaining, that's
the kind of default approach to hash
maps where if a key collision occurs,
you have a linked list or an array
or a vector or whatever at that key.
And you add stuff to that list.
Um, and what you mentioned is kind of
like a Russian nesting doll scenario
where it's hash maps all the way down,
uh, which is very clever and convenient
for Haskell because it means you
don't need any new constraints, right?
And another one of the approaches I've
seen and I saw suggested in this thread
was to use a hash map on the outside
and a regular ordered map on the inside.
Um, and that requires the Ord constraint,
which, you know, some people want to
avoid for hash maps in the first place.
Anyway, I mentioned all that for context.
Uh, but yeah, the, the approach.
Um of your solution, wasn't
accepted by the maintainers.
So, uh, what other approaches
might be possible here?
>> So I think the standard
solution, if we look at other
languages is to use a randomized
salt, on creation of the hash map.
That isn't ideal, because, um, it
means that the orders, the order of the
things in your hash map changes based
when you created that map, for example.
It also causes trouble with unions.
And it also means that your code is
now no longer pure, if you don't,
uh, if you keep the current API.
So there are all sorts of reasons
why you might want to avoid that.
Um, but it looks like we may need
an entire new unordered-containers
package that just works in IO or
some state in order to generate,
a random salt every time.
>> So you're talking about
a random salt per hash map.
So when you make a new hash map,
it comes with a random salt.
Um
—
>> Um that's a, yeah, so
that's a proposed solution.
Another is a random salt
per application boot.
>> Okay.
And that wouldn't have the same
problem with for instance unions
because all hash maps during program
run would have the same salt, but uh,
across runs, it would be different.
>> Yes.
Which also means you can't
serialize them easily.
>> Right.
So it's got other problems.
Um, and sorry, I interrupted you.
You were going to list another,
a potential solution here.
>> Yeah, there are some
other potential solutions.
Um, just not using hash
maps would be a good one.
Um, using a collision resistant
hash function would also work,
except it would defeat the entire
purpose of using hash maps because
now it's actually slower than using
regular maps, for example.
This is a big mess of a
solution space, basically.
>> Um, and so a collision
resistant hash, um, I think I've
seen like SHA256 recommended for that
or SipHash or something like that.
>> I don't think SipHash is collision
resistant if I recall correctly.
>> Um, I've seen it thrown around.
I I'm not, uh, I don't know much
about this problem space, so
>> yeah.
>> Um, And yeah, I agree that would
kind of defeat the purpose of hash map
in the first place, which if it gets
slower than Ord map, which, you know,
the default containers map in Haskell,
you might as well just use Ord map.
Um, and there are other Aeson or excuse
me, other JSON libraries that you could
use in Haskell, for example Waargonaut,
does not give you a hash map by default.
Um, so that's another way
to slice this problem.
Just cut un orders, unordered
containers out of it entirely.
Um, I think the Aeson maintainers
are also pursuing, uh, an avenue
that will allow them to change the
representation behind the scenes.
Where they make this an opaque wrapper.
Um, could you talk about, you know,
do you think that's a reasonable
approach to this problem as well?
>> Yeah, I think just using an
ordered map in the JSON library
is, is the most, um, principled
approach to fixing this problem.
The question is whether the
resulting performance is good enough
for affected, uh, stakeholders.
And in my honest opinion, no one should
care about performance unless they
already have correctness and not the
other way around, but that's personal.
>> I agree with that.
Uh, you know, if the program
doesn't need to be correct, I
can make it as fast as you want.
Uh, but if it's, if it's
gotta be correct, then yeah,
>> yeah.
The best way to make your program
faster, if it doesn't need to be
correct is to just not run it.
>> Exactly.
Yeah.
No results at all is, is super fast.
Um, And I've run a handful of benchmarks,
uh, comparing hash map versus Ord map.
And it seems like for small
objects, Ord map is plenty, fast,
and often faster than hash map.
Um, but that just becomes a
question for users of what
does their workload look like?
You know, do you have an object with
20 keys or does it have 2000 keys?
Um, and my expectation is that for most
people, they don't have a lot of keys.
But, yeah, so, so there's a potential
solution in Aeson there's a potential
solution by switching libraries.
There's a potential solution in
unordered-containers and there's
a potential solution in hashable.
Um, unfortunately I don't think any of
those solutions have been implemented.
Is that right?
>> Uh, not as far as I can tell.
Well, the solution I proposed has been
implemented, but it's now both out of
date and, um, we seem to have agreed
that it's not the right solution.
>> Okay.
And sorry, I didn't mean that,
uh, the work hasn't been done, you
have submitted a PR for this, but
that it's not in the main line.
Like if you just installed
Aeson today, you would still
be vulnerable to this problem
>> Oh yes, absolutely.
And you can check there is a one-line
curl command that you can run in the
blog post to see if you're vulnerable.
>> Yeah.
And actually thank you for producing
that because um, at ACI Learning,
we run Haskell back end services
and we use Aeson and that made
it very easy for me to check.
Are we susceptible to this problem?
We are.
And, um, one of the proposed solutions
that we were talking about of
randomizing the seed on program start,
um, addressed the problem for me.
I hesitate to say fixed it, because
as you mentioned, that relies on
the fact of making a collision
that doesn't care about the salt.
Um, Still needs to be hard.
So like we randomize the salt on every
program launch, but maybe there, we
know it's still possible for somebody to
generate hash collisions in that instance.
>> Yes.
You must somehow guarantee that there
is no side channel through which
your salt is exposed towards a user.
And that involves, for example, never
returning the hash of a empty text to the
user, because that is exactly the salt.
>> Yes, and I am pretty sure we
don't do that, but I can't prove it
>> exactly.
There is always these side channel attacks
are nasty because there are all sorts
of reasons, all sorts of ways through
which someone might discover this.
I'm just even for example, timing
attacks, if someone is nasty enough
about bringing your system down,
you still want to watch out with
this
>> right.
That's true, but I also don't want
to be too defeatist here because I
feel like, you know, making it harder
where you need that timing attack or
you need that side channel attack is
a massive improvement over someone
just grabbing this JSON file off the
shelf and bringing your server down.
>> Absolutely.
So there's a flag you can turn
on in unordered-containers to
randomize the start-up salt.
Um, you will notice that a bunch
of test suites in your dependency
chain might start failing.
And that's because people somehow assumed
that unordered containers were ordered.
>> Yeah.
Um, and actually there, uh, in Stackage
for all of the packages that were
in Stackage I think they tried to
enable this flag by default and it
broke a bunch of those test suites.
So many of them have been fixed,
not all of them, but many of them.
Um, and we actually, when we enabled this
flag for our code base, we saw our own
test suite fail and we weren't expecting
that, you know, we thought uh, we didn't
care about the hashing order of any of
these things, but it turns out that in
some of our test cases, we turned it
into a list and then we accidentally
cared about the order of that list.
So it's pretty easy to fall prey to that.
>> And to be fair, it's entirely
reasonable to expect the pure function
to have the same result every time.
>> Yes, very true.
Um, so yeah, that, um, is a good overview
of the problem in the current, uh, state
and maybe a quick workaround solution.
Um, I want to ask you about kind of the
broader context here of you have known
about this vulnerability for several years
now, and you've tried to get it fixed.
Um, and how does that make you feel
about the maintainers and the package
ecosystem and Haskell as a whole?
>> Um, so yes, I've known
about this for quite a few years.
We've gone through the disposal
responsible disclosure procedure, where
we spent the better part of a year
talking to maintainers in private and.
Very secure communication
channels about that.
This thing exists, how we found it,
how you can check that you have it,
um, and how we might be able to fix it.
And then, um, the conversation
kind of fizzled out.
Um, and it, it finished somewhere
between we've proposed the fix
and then them saying, we don't
find your fix good enough.
And then also not fixing
it in a different way.
Then a bit later, we stopped working
on this and just kept it secret
in case anyone was vulnerable.
We didn't want to expose it.
But then for years after
that still nothing happened.
Um, and then I launched this blog post
because I got permission to publish any
way because given that we know we have
an exploit, we might be able to quote
unquote, pressure people into fixing this.
If we can just show that they're
vulnerable to it themselves and
create some incentives, you know?
And then the big nasty response that
I didn't necessarily expect was yes.
We've known about this for years
and then still no effort to fix it,
>> Right.
Yeah.
That's discouraging.
>> Yes.
It wasn't see, I understand that a
lot of people are doing this work
in their spare time as volunteers.
And so I completely appreciate
when people say you can't expect
us to solve this because I'm doing
this for free and I need to eat.
But the response wasn't we don't have
the time to fix this or I need to eat.
So I can't do this for free.
The response was more like we
care and then nothing gets fixed.
Nothing actually gets fixed.
So it was a lot of lip service
and not a lot of actual fixing
that frustrates me a bit.
>> Yeah, that does sound frustrating.
And I'm hopeful, I've seen,
uh, the Aeson library.
They seem to be making moves
to suggest that they're moving
to that opaque representation.
So perhaps in the next major version
of Aeson, we'll have a fix or a
fix will be possible for this.
But I suspect also there will be
a lot of downstream breakage as a
result of that, because many things
rely on the particular representation
of objects in the Aeson library.
>> Yup.
Yeah.
So, uh, we outlined the proposed
solutions and one of them was
just use ordered maps in Aeson.
And the big downside was that
that breaks backward compatibility
because objects are part of the API.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, frankly, I couldn't care less
about backward compatibility in that case.
Um, if it means that things get fixed.
On the other hand, it's not nice.
>> Yeah.
Um, I agree.
I think that in the presence of a security
vulnerability, or maybe not security, just
a vulnerability like this, um, backwards
compatibility should take a backseat
to, as you said earlier, correctness.
Let's make it work correctly
in more circumstances.
And then we can talk about
supporting other, other stuff.
>> Well, you might say that
user input, isn't one of the supported
use cases and then not fix it, but then
we have a bigger problem of, we don't have
any, um, JSON libraries for user input.
Uh actually, you mentioned
one, but I haven't used it.
>> Yeah.
I actually haven't used it either.
It's called  Waargonaut and
I'll be sure to link to it.
And my understanding of
it is that internally they
represent objects as vectors.
And when you want to parse one, you can
either keep it as a vector or choose to
change it into an ordered map or a hash
map or whatever is convenient for you.
Which makes a lot of sense to me.
And in fact seems like a good
representation of JSON objects anyway,
since although they're nominally
not ordered, sometimes the order is
important of the keys and when you
turn it into a hash map, you lose that.
>> Yup.
Yeah.
That makes sense.
And then there's also
duplicate keys, I guess.
>> Yes.
Yeah.
Do you want, last one
wins, first one wins.
Do you want to merge them somehow?
You are unable to make that
decision with Aeson library.
>> Yeah.
And we also talked about replacing Aeson
entirely internally at the time with
something like optparse-applicative,
but for JSON parsing.
So if you know about yamlparse-applicative
basically that except instead of going
through the Aeson representation, you
would go directly from byte strings
to end representation at the cost of
not being able to do monadic parsing.
>> Right.
So I'm not familiar with that library,
but that sounds similar to me in Aeson
when you encode so the opposite of decode.
You can skip generating a JSON value
entirely and just generate the bytes.
So is it similar to that in reverse?
>> Yeah.
Yes, exactly.
Um, yeah, that's right.
I'm trying to find another example of
this, uh, applicative style parsing,
but I can't think of another one right
now.
>> Well, you've mentioned
optparse-applicative, which is for
parsing command line arguments.
And if there's this yamlparse-applicative,
I hadn't heard of that before, but that
sounds similar and I'm sure there's like
a TOML one and whatever config format.
>> Yep.
And there, the nice benefit of
that is that you can generate the
schema of the thing you're parsing
from the same value as the thing
that you used to do the parsing.
So you get automatic docs.
>> Right.
It's like a description of how to
parse the thing, because as you
mentioned, since it's not monadic,
you can't depend on previous values.
So then you can describe
the entire thing statically.
>> Yes, exactly.
And this gets you in trouble with
recursive, well the documentation
part gets you into trouble with
recursive parses for example.
But that's another
story.
>> Yeah.
Um, so yeah, that would be an
interesting thing to explore.
And I think the Waargonaut developers
have mentioned that before, because they.
They use cursors for parsing
rather than the more typical, um,
monadic stuff that Aeson uses.
So yeah, there, there's a lot of
interesting stuff going on there.
Um, but yeah, I, uh, thank you for
walking us through this vulnerability.
Uh, I feel like we've touched all
the high points that I'm aware of.
Is there anything else that we haven't
covered that you wanna talk about?
>> Maybe, but I don't
know how to phrase it yet.
There is some, um, I have certain
complaints about the way this is
handled in terms of communication.
There were a lot of, let's say nasty
responses, or let's say less than
polite responses, um, which were.
Rather inappropriate in a situation
of common crisis rather than
an attack on any individual.
And I feel I did my best to
address a technical issue
rather than a person problem.
I also don't think any particular
individual is at fault for this per se,
but it seems like that's how it was.
>> I agree.
Um, I am a bystander in all of
this, but I feel like your blog
post laid out the vulnerability very
clearly and how you arrived at it.
And it provided a, you
know, off the shelf.
Here's how to test if you're affected
type of thing, which I think is a
really, um, useful thing to have
in this type of situation, because
then nobody can deflect by saying
this is only a problem in theory.
But no, it's actually
a problem in practice.
And then the response.
Yeah.
I'm not looking to call anyone out
specifically, but it is frustrating
to make something like this
and then have people say, well,
don't use Aeson for user input.
Like, are they even.
It's extremely common to do that.
And I feel like everyone in the
Haskell community, if somebody
has said, Hey, I want to run a web
server and I want to parse JSON.
Everyone  would say use Aeson.
So it's not realistic to say,
oh, this isn't a problem in
practice, or you shouldn't do that.
>> Yes.
And some of the reactions were
things along the lines of, we've
known about this for a long time.
And that irked me in a
different way because that.
Where they previously had
the possible deniability of
not knowing about this thing.
Now they've gone from not knowing about
this thing to being someone who didn't
raise it or didn't fix it, especially if
such talk is coming from the maintainers.
>> Yeah, I agree.
That's, that's a strange comment
for me to read because it suggests
that they knew about it, but they
didn't care for whatever reason.
And I would expect, you know, as
you mentioned, uh, we're talking
about volunteers here, nobody that
I know of is getting paid to work
on Aeson or an unordered-containers
or hashable, but at the same time,
if there is this vulnerability, I'm
not the person maintaining Aeson.
And I may be vaguely aware that
hash collisions are possible, but I
would hope that the maintainers of
these libraries would address those
concerns when they find out about them.
>> Yeah.
You would, or at least maybe like
put out a call for funds to fix.
If, if, even if like, if they have
to eat as well, which I'm sure they
do, then at least ask, I guess, if
you don't want it to do, don't want
to do it because you're a volunteer
figure out a way to make it happen
without you having to do it for free.
>> Right.
And, uh, there's two things I
want to mention on that note.
One is that now with the Haskell
Foundation, I think there is a push
to have some funds available for
maintainers to do that type of thing.
Um, I think this is still in
the kind of the planning phase.
So it may, may happen
sometime in the future.
Uh, that could be a possibility.
And then, uh, the Dhall library,
uh, has a similar setup where they
are aware of some problems or some
things they want to fix or improve.
And they will put bounties on those and
say, this is something that if you're
in the community and you're reading
this and you think you could fix it,
we'll pay you X many dollars to do that.
Um, which I think could be a good
approach in this type of situation.
Um, okay, well, uh, again, I feel like
we've covered all the high notes here.
Um, I personally would recommend,
although it's not an actual solution to
this problem, the flag that we mentioned
for the hashable library to randomize
the initial seed on program, start if
it's reasonable for your program to
enable that flag, I would suggest it.
So that some script kiddy can't
grab this JSON file and bring
your production server down.
Um, and then as soon as the Aeson
library itself is updated with
this opaque representation of
objects, I would recommend anyone
who depends on Aeson to, uh, handle
that change as quickly as possible.
So that the community at large can move
forward and move on from this problem.
>> Absolutely.
And I would personally like to be
involved in, in, uh, in fixing this,
if I can help, um, or even if anyone is
interested in funding, a, uh secure from
the start library for Aeson in particular,
uh, for JSON in particular, then I'd
be happy to help with that as well.
>> All right.
Well, um, I think that's
all that I've got.
Any closing thoughts, Syd?
>> Nope.
It was very interesting to
be involved in this matter.
>> All right.
Well, thank you so much for joining
us on the Haskell Weekly podcast.
And, uh, this week as every week,
we're brought to you by our sponsor
and my employer, ACI Learning.
If you want to get started in IT
training, you can go over to ITPro.TV
and use promo code HaskellWeekly30.
To get 30% off the lifetime
of your subscription.
And if you want to learn more about
Haskell Weekly, please check out our
website, which is HaskellWeekly.News.
So thanks again, Syd.
And we'll see you next week.